SEM Image data set of abaxial leaf surfaces of European tree species

Study site and sampling: 
The mature leaves and needles were collected from a managed mixed temperate forest in the Hainich-Dün region of Thuringia, Germany (51°120N 10°180E). The forest site is growing at about 500 m elevation with 600 to 800 mm precipitation and 6 to 7.5 °C mean annual temperature. The bedrock is limestone with 30 to 1 m cambisol soil mainly from weathering (see also Tanunchai et al., 2022). Briefly, leaves and needles (Table S1) were sampled from the ground up to 6 m at the sun-exposed southern edge of a tree crown using a telescopic leaf cutter. Most of the sampled tree species were collected in a single stand within about 5 ha. Thus, we examined a forest community where trees interact at canopy level to resolve leaf surface structures independent of variation in site conditions. A minimum of 200 g leaves and needles per tree individual were collected (each with five true replicates (tree)) in October 2019, with new gloves in sterilized plastic bags. The samples were transported on ice within 3h to the laboratory and freshly used and one part stored at −80°C for subsequent molecular approaches. 

Scanning Environmental Microscopy (SEM): 
Surface structures of the leaves were examined using a scanning electron microscope (EVO15, Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH). Fresh leaf material was analyzed without fixation or coating with conductive materials, and under conditions of significantly reduced chamber vacuum. Images were collected at two different magnification scales (1900x / 230x). Additionally, the instrument is equipped with an Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) detector (UltimMax, Oxford Instruments), enabling elemental analysis alongside and overlaying the imaging. The distribution of C, N, and O in the surface structure was determined for selected species. Element distribution was then quantified using AZtec software (Oxford Instruments). 
